welcome to topcast and to part four of
chapter nine of the fabric of Reality by
David Deutsch quantum computers this is
episode 193 if you can believe it and
today we finally reached the conclusion
of that chapter it's been a long time in
coming I know and this one is going to
be a little different to all of the
others because we're going to be going
into quite some mathematical detail but
not too much don't worry there is only a
little left to read from the book itself
in terms of this chapter chapter nine
but in a sense it's the crescendo part
of the book about quantum computers as
I've said throughout my discussion of
this chapter this chapter is worthy of
being a book in itself we will see that
again today because here we get to a
very practical application of quantum
Computing and we get to do a little bit
of as I've just said mathematics a
little bit of fun mathematics along the
way we're going to outline and spend
most of the episode outlining Shaw's
algorithm and some of the mathematics
underpinning Shaw's algorithm Shaw's
algorithm discovered by Peter Shore in I
think it was 1994 is one of the most
important Quantum algorithms that is
known and although it does get a
significant mention in the chapter in
the part of the chapter that I'm about
to read right at the end of the chapter
and David provides a great overview of
that I thought it might be might be
useful for some people it might be
interesting for some people to drill
down into at least some of the details
not all of them though throughout my
outline of Shaw's algorithm I'm going to
provide links to other resources that
you might want to go to in order to go
even deeper than what I'm about to do
now so this is going to hopefully bridge
the gap for those of you who are fans of
the work of David Deutsch in particular
the fabric of reality and would like to
understand some of those higher level
graduate physics lectures that you
sometimes encounter on YouTube when you
go looking for the details of quantum
theory people are often asking me what
book should I get in order to begin
understanding quantum's Theory what what
text should I study and I always say to
people well go to YouTube and
unfortunately when you do go to YouTube
a lot of it is presented at The Graduate
level it already presumes that you've
done you know sort of a year or two of
undergraduate physics at least not to
mention the mathematics in order to
understand some of this stuff so what
I'm hoping is that with this episode I
bring you to a level where you can then
go off to those other YouTube channels
that are at the higher graduate physics
level and at least begin to have an
insight into what they're talking about
but you won't need any graduate level
physics and you won't need any graduate
level mathematics today like I say this
is the whole purpose of this is so that
you can get to a point where you might
want to go and have a look at those
professional physics professors says
that are talking about for example
Shaw's algorithm and the textbooks that
explain this stuff as well some people
say that you know the beginning of
infinity fabric of reality is already at
a higher level and some people say that
top cast is sometimes pitched at too
high level I suppose I can take that as
a compliment or not sometimes I'm
actually aiming you know with these
episodes and with what I do here to have
a resource which requires as little
prerequisite knowledge as possible and
you know like incidentally episode 192
which was not squarely about the work of
David Deutsch it certainly as always
mentions David Deutsch in his work it
that episode 192 was an exception to all
of this in two respects it wasn't about
the fabric of reality in the beginning
of Infinity uh or even necessarily
popper but it did assume a fair bit of
prerequisite knowledge knowledge of
talkcast I'm assuming if you listen to
episode 192 which is all about the
sources of ideas well at least that's
kind of what it's called what is what it
is the origin of our ideas and spoiler
alert I don't answer that question I
answer a different question
but what I'm doing there is I'm assuming
you're a fan of topcast and you've
listened to lots of other top cast
episodes and you know where I'm coming
from so to speak so yeah I recommend
listening to that because yeah that's
one exception to the rule that I
normally have that you can just come to
topcast without any prerequisite
knowledge and on the other hand I'm also
trying to say some hopefully original
things there as well so that's also a
depart from what I normally do here in
this episode I'm not going to be saying
so much that's original certainly not
original from me I'm not coming up with
any new ideas here I'm stealing the
ideas of others so to speak borrowing
their content so there's a difference
you know episode 192 assuming a lot of
background knowledge lifting off from
the presumption that you know for
example there are two kinds of knowledge
in the world there's mimetic and there's
genetic and popular in epistemology just
is the way that we Explain how how
knowledge grows and is improved over
time all that kind of stuff is just
assumed as prerequisite knowledge so
you're starting at a high level there
but here today in this episode I'm going
very very basic from the start indeed
I'm going to go over some ground that
we've already trodden in the previous
three episodes on Quantum computation so
that we have fresh in our mind the
knowledge required to go even further
today the fundamentals that I'll be
talking about today are going as deep as
I can on some of these fundamentals is
going to involve you know literally
things like high school level
mathematics I'm not going to go so deep
as to you know teach people how to count
or speak English or kind of that but
that that's all I'm assuming is that you
know how to count and you know how to
speak English so this is not going to be
or rather it's going to quickly become
boring for anyone who has for example a
degree in science of any sort whether
it's chemistry or mathematics or you
know physics or even if you're generally
just well read in these particular
subjects I'm going to be taking you back
to for the rest of you primary school or
at least early high school now of course
I did teach High School mathematics and
science so I have some understanding of
what you know the majority of people out
there were able to Garner from you know
the the 13 years or so they spent in
high school so I've got an idea of what
your starting point is but I also
recognize of course that very many
people who pass through high school just
never get these particular lessons I'm
going to be delivering today in two
senses you know the first the teachers
were particularly great and perhaps
didn't deliver the material in a
particularly interesting way and second
and more importantly you know you as an
individual might never have been
interested in any of this stuff and
quite right too unless you're like me
you want to found any of this
particularly interesting but you know
hey if you can remember some basic
number Theory
then even some chemistry in physics from
high school this could be the podcast
for you
it's going to be unusual absolutely
because this episode ostensibly is about
the stratospherically high level
complexities and cutting-edge knowledge
that is quantum computation but here
I'll be taking it all the way back to
prime numbers and what chemical elements
are why am I going to be touching on any
of that well best we go straight to the
book to the fabric of reality to begin
with read a little and take it from
there and things will slowly unfold I'm
going to be taking it very slow because
the the top of the mountain that we're
looking for is Shaw's algorithm and I
don't want to leave any of you trackers
behind if you're interested in doing
this interested in trying to understand
Shaw's algorithm so we're going to take
the most gradual Winding Road up this
mountain
as we possibly can rather than you know
hauling ourselves vertically up the
sheer phase which is what I find so
often if I'm trying to learn some new
area of physics or something you know
you try and understand String Theory by
watching some YouTube videos and and
what you get is well there's the
professor at the top of the mountain
that already has reached the Pinnacle
and what they're going to do is to ask
you CLI to climb the sheer face
in other words they're assuming so much
prerequisite knowledge already I'm not
going to do that I'm not going to do
that so let's just get into it okay um
David writes on page 214 of the fabric
of reality here in chapter nine quote
the fact that the repertoire of the
universal quantum computer contains
environments whose rendering is
classically intractable implies that new
classes of purely mathematical
computations must have become tractable
too for the laws of physics are as
Galileo said expressed in mathematical
language and rendering an environment is
tantamount to evaluating certain
mathematical functions and indeed many
mathematical tasks have now been
discovered which could be efficiently
performed by Quantum computation we're
all known classical methods are
intractable the most spectacular of
these is the task of factoring large
numbers the method known as Shores
algorithm was discovered in 1994 by
Peter Shaw of bell Laboratories while
this book was in proof further
spectacular Quantum algorithms have been
discovered including Grover's algorithm
for searching long lists very rapidly
end quote
so what we just read There was quote
that many mathematical tasks have now
been discovered which could be
efficiently performed by Quantum
computation where all known classical
methods are intractable the most
spectacular of these is the task of
factoring large numbers the method known
as Shores algorithm was discovered in
1994 by Peter Shore of bell Laboratories
so end quote so our problem there is
about factoring large numbers
firstly what does factoring even mean
what is factorizing about well if you've
got a number like 12 we can say that the
numbers that multiply together to give
12 are its factors so like six and two
because six times two gives you 12 so
six and two are some factors of 12. okay
but that's not quite what we mean in the
context of Shaw's algorithm and what
David's talking about and what we're
talking about in general when it comes
to factoring what we're really
interested in is prime factorization the
prime factorization of a number so what
prime numbers when you multiply them
together give you 12. well consider that
we've just said that you know 6 times 2
is 12 but 6 isn't a prime 2 is but six
isn't what does prime mean Prime means
it's a number that has no factors except
itself and one two is the first and the
lowest of all the prime numbers
um its factors are two and one
or you know the number seven is prime
because you can't break that down any
more simply than seven times one gives
you seven there's no other integers that
you can multiply together to give seven
but numbers that aren't Prime
like six or like eight for example
they're called composite now sure with
eight you can have eight times one but
you can also have four times two and as
soon as you have something other than
just the number times one then you've
got this composite number but just for
our purposes now let's just focus on 12.
what prime numbers multiply together to
give 12 well let's take our six times
two
like we've already said 2 is prime so we
found one of them two is one of the
prime factors as for six well we can
break that down what are its factors
well 6 is equal to two times three aha
two and three they're both Prime so then
12 becomes two times six or two times
three times two or another way to write
that would be 2 times 2 times 3 or in
other words 2 squared times three and so
we say the prime factorization of 12 is
2 squared times three its prime factors
are
two and three which you write as two
squared times three it's all then just
prime numbers okay what we've got there
2 squared times three two lots of two
and one lot of three that's that's all
prime numbers hence we call it the prime
factors of 12. okay so now the
remarkable fact about mathematical
reality is all all whole natural
counting numbers can be factored in this
way no matter the number you can Factor
them into primes Isn't that cool that's
that's really cool and this this fact
about reality about mathematics it's
even got a name it's called it's so
important it's called the fundamental
theorem of arithmetic and if you want to
State it semi-formally it it says every
positive integer can be expressed in
exactly one way as a product of prime
factors
exactly one way that is except for
rearranging the numbers it's also called
the unique factorization theorem but I
like fundamental theorem of arithmetic
that sounds much cooler this makes the
prime numbers in mathematics into
something like the elements on the
periodic table
um so as as prime numbers out of
mathematics elements are to chemistry
every positive integer can be decomposed
into the product of prime numbers and
everything chemical can be decomposed
into elements now if you don't know what
I'm talking about there well out there
in in physical reality anything you can
point to is that's made of matter which
is to say chemicals well all that stuff
anything you can like Point your finger
at you go well that's made of chemicals
and all matter
is made of is chemicals and all of those
chemicals all of that matter can be
broken down into simpler things unless
you've already got an element so let's
say you've got ocean water okay ocean
water for argument's sake we can just
call it salt water okay in reality
there's quite a few chemicals in ocean
water but presume presume for argument's
sake it's just salt water you've taken
out all the other rubbish that might be
in there and all you've got is a mixture
of salt and water in your ocean water
but if you wanted to break down that
ocean water that salt water into its
constituent substances then what you
could do is you boil away the water and
then you collect it in something called
a condenser that that process is called
evaporation and condensation or
distillation even and what you get as a
consequence of that you know boiling
away the water is and then condensing it
again is you get you collect the water
and you've got pure water pure H2O on
the one hand and what you've left behind
is pure salt so you've got two pure
substances now and the these two pure
substances the water and the salt
they're known as compounds they're also
called pure substances because no
physical means or separation can be used
to further break them down you've got
pure water on the one hand and pure salt
on the other hand and they're known as
compounds because they're each made up
of elements themselves
even simpler things the water is H2O
that's hydrogen bonded to oxygen and the
salt is sodium chloride NaCl sodium
bonded to chlorine now although no
further amount of distillation or
filtering or centrifuging name your
physical process can separate the
hydrogen from the oxygen or the sodium
from the chloride you can use chemical
means or separations or not physical
means but chemical means okay so the
chemical means are a kind of physical
means but here we get into the ambiguity
of language and we're distinguishing
between purely I would say mechanical
physics and chemical bonding the
artificial dividing line between the two
subjects physics and chemistry so
anyways you can you can separate
hydrogen from oxygen in water you just
need electricity one can use something
called a Hoffman voltameter that you
know looks like this and if you're
watching on YouTube what you'll see is
that one of the terminals is positive
and the other one is negative and long
story short this thing breaks the bond
between the hydrogen and the oxygen in
water and you end up with the two gases
hydrogen and oxygen now you've got
elements hydrogen and oxygen appear on
the periodic table what is not on the
periodic table pure water is not on the
periodic table but hydrogen and oxygen
are elements like hydrogen and oxygen
are more basic than compounds because
now once you've got an element no matter
what you throw at the oxygen or the
hydrogen in terms of chemical processes
you can't simplify them any further
there's only one kind of atom that
exists in oxygen gas oxygen atoms and
the same is true of hydrogen there's
only hydrogen atoms in the hydrogen gas
water on the other hand pure though we
say it can be consists of chemically
bonded hydrogen and oxygen to make the
water mole Q now as for as for sodium
chloride that's regular table salt that
you get from evaporating the water away
from ocean water well it's made of the
element sodium and the element Chlorine
and never a more profound Point can be
made about the wonders of chemistry than
by considering what sodium and chlorine
actually are the sodium is a very
reactive metal it's so reactive that if
you just take a small amount and throw
it into some water it catches fire and
can sometimes even explode go to YouTube
and just look up you know sodium and
water reaction and you'll see what I
mean it's a remarkable thing this sodium
stuff because it's a really soft metal
it's a metal just like many other metals
are but you know it's shiny and it's
it's going to conduct electricity
you can cut it with a butter knife it's
really soft and like I say you throw it
in the water and it'll catch fire so
it's one of these weird situations where
if if you have a fire that involves
sodium throwing water on it won't put
the fire out it'll just make things
worse
so that's sodium and then on the other
hand in your table salt not only do you
have sodium the form of sodium but you
also have chlorine a deadly poisonous
gas but when you take the sodium and
explosive metal and chlorine a deadly
poisonous gas and you chemically Bond
them together the deadly gas and the
reactive explosive metal come together
to make a rather harmless spice that you
add to your fish and chips salt sodium
chloride shares very few properties of
either the sodium metal or the chlorine
gas the two ingredients if you like that
that make it up so I know this is a
Meandering Way to explain things my
point here is that you can get down to
some fundamentals you can get down to
some basics
there's a base set of substances that
make up all the matter in the universe
and they're called the elements
from the elements from these things on
the periodic table
everything else that you can point to
out there in the universe
is made of this stuff okay so ignore
neutron stars and black holes and exotic
stuff like that but let's say everything
on the earth you could point to yeah
just about is a as an arrangement of
elements of some sort or other and yeah
for whatever you can point to it can in
theory be
decomposed as we say into its
constituent elements that's the
technical term in chemistry
decomposition the decomposition of water
results in hydrogen and oxygen for salt
it's sodium and chlorine and and so on
it goes now in a similar way all of our
counting numbers every number you can
think of that's a counting number above
you know zero or one two three four five
six seven on forever can be considered a
rearrangement of prime numbers all
numbers are either prime numbers
themselves like substances out there in
the universe everything is either an
element
or they result from the multiplication
of prime numbers in the case of
chemicals they result from the chemical
combination of elements that's a fun
fact especially if you don't know it
already figuring out the prime factors
of you know random numbers is a little
like it's a puzzle you can do just think
of any number that's yeah not
ridiculously large okay let's do this as
an exercise this is what I'm going to be
doing in this episode okay we're going
to be doing a few little mathematical
exercises
let's begin modestly let's begin with
the number 100. here's what you do just
pick any two numbers any that you like
that when you multiply them together you
get 100 okay what's going to jump to
mind for most people maybe 50 times two
maybe ten times ten let's go with 10
times 10. Well 10 is not prime okay but
10 itself is 2 times 5. aha so
two times five is ten so therefore if
you want a hundred you've got 10 times
10 which means 2 times 5 times 2 times 5
or better yet
2 times 2 times 5 times 5 just
rearranging those numbers which means 2
squared times 5 squared there's our
prime factors there's our prime factors
or our prime number decomposition and
decomposition there is also the correct
term just as it was in chemistry now
notice that we we chose randomly right
we said 10 times 10. now you might think
but I could have said 25 times 4 or 20
times 5 or 50 times 2 any of those would
have also resulted in a hundred well you
do the exercise you can prove it to
yourself that no matter where you start
from you're going to get a unique
Prime decomposition for example 25 times
4 if you had to start it there well 25
is 5 times 5 and 4 is 2 times 2. so once
again you're left with
with 25 times 4 5 times 5 times 2 times
2 which is 5 squared times 2 squared or
in other words 2 squared times 5 squared
which is what we got when starting with
10 times 10. okay okay I'm laboring the
point where am I going with any of this
and what it's got to do with quantum
computers we're getting there we're
getting there but as I say we're taking
the long route because you know the view
is nice and we're taking a nice stroll
in order to get there some might like
the highway I like the coastal Trek lots
more sights to see along the way
although it's going to take us a little
bit longer here's the thing about prime
factorization if you stick with small
numbers like 100 things are pretty easy
but it doesn't take long before you
begin to have troubles it takes much
much longer just by adding another digit
you know 100's got three digits but you
know let's do
1200 now we've got four digits how much
harder is it going to be well let's see
let's see how much longer it takes this
time all right
1200 is 120 times 10. okay so 120 well
that's 12 times 10. so we've got 12
times 10 times 10 which we're using the
numbers that we've already used
previously so we can say well 12 that's
2 squared times 3 times 10 times 10 so
we've got 2 squared times 3 times 2
squared times 5 squared which is 2 to
the power of 4 times 3 times 5 squared
okay that took a little bit longer
there's a lot more numbers involved
there okay then let's take it up a notch
let's pick a five digit number uh
fourteen thousand three hundred and
eighty eight we've got five digits and
apparently nothing related to what we've
seen in the previous examples I've been
through with
twelve and a hundred and one thousand
two hundred so what to do well it's an
even number you know ends in eight you
know 14 388 so that helps the fact that
it's even so it must be two times
something so we can we can get out our
calculators and divide through by two
and you end up with
7194. okay we're making progress two
times seven thousand one hundred ninety
four even again so once again get our
calculator out we'll have two times two
times three thousand five hundred and
ninety seven after dividing by two once
again oh well
3597.
not an even number maybe it's divisible
by three though well there are
divisibility tests that I'm not going to
go through now but if you try it out
yourself with a calculator you'll find
out that no it's not divisible by three
there's a remainder left over so what's
the next prime number five but well if
you do remember this division ability
test you will know that all multiples of
five and in either zero or five well
okay let's keep going we'll try number
seven next that's the next prime number
that's no good what about eleven ah
jackpot jackpot so now we've got two
times two times eleven times
327 that equals 14 388 well good 327
looks quite promising actually it's not
even but it looks like it could be a
multiple of three and indeed it is it is
it's three times 109 so now we're up to
two times two times eleven times three
times 109.
109 now well you can check for yourself
you can check for yourself in fact 109
is itself a prime number it's got no
factors except itself and a one so only
one times 109 equals 109 so returning to
our original problem
fourteen thousand three hundred and
eighty eight has a prime factorization
of reordering the numbers a little bit
here two times two times three times
eleven times a hundred and nine or a
better way to write it more compact is 2
squared times three times eleven times
109.
well that was quite a bit of work even
with a calculator on the other hand if I
give you
a calculator and 2 squared times 3 times
11 times 109 well you can get that done
as quick as it takes to punch the
numbers in multiplying numbers together
to get an answer is easy relatively
speaking but decomposing that same
number into its prime factors takes a
lot longer you just try it if I pick
some random Primes
2 to the power of three times three
times five times seven and I say what do
you get on the calculator it's easy
it'll take you a few seconds but if I
say okay
find the prime factors of 12 566 well
now all the work is still ahead of you
you don't know what to start you know
punching into the calculator well it's
even so divide by two begin there and
the thing is even if you give this job
to a computer it faces a similar
challenge the same challenge in fact
it's much harder to search for the prime
factors of some big number than it is to
multiply out numbers to get a bigger
number this fundamental fact of reality
but finding factors is hard and
exponentially harder for every single
digit you add so four digits is
exponentially a harder problem than
finding the factors of a three-digit
number and five digit numbers are
exponentially harder than four digits
and so on and so forth it means the
problem becomes intractable in the
technical sense that we've talked about
in this chapter before remember remember
how David Deutsch actually defines
intractability earlier on in the book
well he wrote back then let me return to
this this is coming from page 198 and he
wrote quote what counts for tractability
according to the standard definitions is
not the actual time taken to multiply a
particular pair of numbers but the fact
that the time does not increase too
sharply when we apply the same method to
ever larger numbers end quote and then
David goes on to explain that if you
increase the number of digits in the
numbers you are multiplying comparing
multiplying two three digit numbers to
two four digit numbers the time taken is
not vastly different indeed he does a
Rough and Ready calculation back there
in the chapter in order for him to make
the point that the time taken is around
30 more for each digit that you add but
on the other hand the reverse of
multiplication factorization becomes
intractable because for each digit that
you add going from 3D to four digits to
five six whatever the increase in time
taken for each additional digit is not
just thirty percent it's three hundred
percent a factor of three times more
tripling the running time he says and
David goes on to write quote so the
running time would increase in
geometrical proportion that is
exponentially with the number of digits
in the number we are factorizing
factorizing a number with 25 digit
factors by this method would occupy all
the computers on Earth for centuries
this is what we mean by saying that the
factorization of large numbers is
intractable end quote now this fact
about reality that finding the prime
numbers of some number can be very hard
and indeed intractably difficult and
once you get to a number that is the
product of factors Each of which is 25
digits long we find it would occupy all
the computers on Earth for centuries
that that fact can be exploited and it
is exploited by those who want to send
secret messages and that includes you of
course almost every day although you
might not be aware of it every time you
want to transmit for example information
from your credit card or your debit card
or these days of course from your mobile
phone to your bank you want to transmit
information about paying for something
you want that information to be secret
so that even if someone intercepts it
there would be nothing useful they could
do with it you don't want them to have
access to your private passwords and so
on and so forth that allow you access to
your bank account we want that
information to be hidden somehow
encrypted is the word we use the
information is scrambled hidden in a
secret code of a kind that only the bank
can decode well how can that work well
there was a method figured out in 1977
and that's known as the RSA crypto
system RSI stands for reversed Shamir
and Adelman they're the three
mathematicians computer scientists
actually and cryptographers if you want
to be precise all from MIT that the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
and they created the system a curious
part of the history of this is that
another fellow Clifford Cox was his name
a British mathematician working for a
British intelligence agency he had
actually discovered the same system four
years earlier back in 1973 but no one
knew because he worked for the
intelligence services so his work was
classified so he gets remembered only as
a footnote to all this sadly the RSA
system is a kind of public key
cryptography so it's called now in RSA
cryptography RSA numbers can contain you
know 100 600 digits or 1200 digits in
some cases so numbers that are 600 or
1200 digits long numbers that would take
many many lifetimes of the universe to
factor using all the classical computers
on Earth working together so intractable
for all practical purposes or practical
purposes impossible to do because the
factors are going to be around half that
length you know a little over 300 digits
long for a 600 digit long you know
number examples of these RSA numbers are
out there you can you can find lists of
them on Wikipedia and cash prizes are
offered if you can find the prime
factors of them for all the smaller ones
like there are only like 100 digits long
people have found the prime factors but
those factors are only you know 10 or 12
digits long something like that not the
25 digit long factors that David was
talking about the the largest one that
there's a cash prize for is a 617 digits
as far as I can find out and that's more
like the size of the number that is used
today in the RSA crypto system so how's
this all work well let's do an example
and I'm not going to hide the fact that
I'm just stealing this I'm stealing this
example actually if I'm an Australian
mathematician from deakin University her
name is Victoria Lynn Batten so I'm
stealing all of her numbers rather than
trying to think up them I've been doing
enough of that already and I'll do them
do some more of that later on as well
um so let me use her numbers and I'll
turn it into my own explanation because
yeah like I say otherwise it just takes
too long to do all this so let's begin
so say I'm in the business of trying to
transmit to you a secret message
let's assume you're on the other side of
the planet and I need to get to you the
secret information about the cost our
company that we happen to share is going
to be charging for some new widget we've
been working on inventing together
let's call the cost of this new thing
that we've invented 99 I want to
transmit the number 99 to you without it
being feasible for anyone and who
intercepts the message to possibly know
that 99 is encoded in it somewhere
here's what we do you start by choosing
a couple of prime numbers now in reality
of course you choose really big ones
that are so unwieldy no computer can
possibly figure out what they are once
they've been multiplied together
we're going to make this artificially
very easy just to see the process okay
so we're not going to use the big
numbers so you're going to find this is
easy but in reality you'd use big
numbers and again when I say big numbers
I mean hundreds of digits long which
makes the word unwieldy a serious
understatement we want wieldy so we're
going to stick with something small okay
so so let's say you pick 11 and 17.
they're they're going to be your prime
numbers uh as we do in these things
we're going to call them p and q p
equals 11 Q equals 17. okay step two
we're going to multiply p and Q together
to get n okay P times Q is 11 times 17
that's 187. n equals 187 this n is one
of your public keys
it doesn't matter if anyone knows n in
real life n is absolutely massive right
because p and Q are absolutely massive
now what we also need you've got one
public key you've got your n you also
need another one and this one's going to
be a lot smaller in the business they
call it e e for exponent and we'll we'll
see why in just a second the rules for
generating e are as follows firstly
subtract one from P that gives us 10
okay 11 take away one ten and take away
one from Q to get the 16 then multiply
these two numbers together to get a new
number okay P minus 1 times Q minus one
and get 160. Now find the prime factors
of 160. okay well 160 is we're just
going to go through what I've already
described to you in the the you know the
earlier part of this podcast to well we
go through this process like 160 is 16
times 10 that's 16 is 4 squared and 10
is 2 times 5 so
figure all out you've got 2 to the power
of 4 times 2 times 5. so in other words
2 to the power of 5 times 5. so the
prime factors are two and five okay two
to the power of 5 times 5. now because
of okay I'm doing an explainer video
here I'm not going a formal proof by any
stretch of the imagination so let's just
say because of mathematics go and look
up the details if you want here's a link
okay here's a link and I'll I hope I'll
remember to put this in the description
to this video and you can check okay
um for yourself that the reason
is and we will sort of touch on this
later on E can't share any factors with
160. so it can't be two or five
it should be prime but not P or Q either
so let's just pick the number seven
let's let e equal seven okay because it
meets all of our criteria it can't be
two and five
and it can't be p and Q all right so now
we're ready and now we're ready to say
we've got a system of encryption given
we've got an n and we've got an e and
these are our public keys
you can take n and you can take e and
you can publish them wherever you like
there are tools online actually to to
help with this here's one of them
so just to recap what are we doing
um I'm wanting to transmit to you some
top secret business information that our
competitors we just don't want them to
know it's the number 99 that's going to
be the price of our new widget we don't
want those pesky competitors knowing the
price before release date because we're
going to get lots of publicity by coming
in you know under a hundred dollars
before they have a chance to react and
change their own price and catch all the
social media Buzz whatever and we we
know they're watching our conversation
so I need to get this 99 to you secretly
by the way it doesn't need to be a
number it could be any message at all we
can convert that into a number after all
all the keys on uh you know a computer
keyboard are represented by numbers in
the computer system uh our keys on
regular keyboards conform to what's
known as the ASCII system every letter
has a number and every symbol on the
keyboard indeed has a number associated
with it so in theory you could have a
long string of numbers that can be
encrypted using the system I'm about to
tell you about and then decoded using a
table like this one or you know of
course a regular computer will do a
quick smart for you okay so what I need
to do is to take this 99 which no one
knows
and also take my n and E and nne we both
have access to and everyone has access
to it that doesn't matter
and I raised my secret information my
secret number 99 to the power of E so 99
to the power of seven well that's an
even bigger number in fact it's 93
trillion 206 billion 534 million seven
hundred and ninety thousand six hundred
and ninety nine
well now we take that number and divide
it by the N we found earlier 187 and my
calculator tells me it's 498 billion 430
million 667
329.94167470588235 and so it goes and
the reason for this will become apparent
after a quick diversion into modular
arithmetic okay so let's keep
try and keep that in mind
what modular arithmetic now well
basically it's counting in a circle
everyone's familiar with it you do it
with an analog clock well at least
anyone who's able to read an analog
clock with a regular analog clock we
count in lots of 12. the purpose of
modular arithmetic among other things is
to enable us to talk about remainders
and it's sometimes to find how a
sequence of numbers in some sequence of
numbers the remainder when you're
dividing by some constant is periodic
the remainder is periodic or can show
periodicity that is to say it repeats
over time this is going to become
absolutely key for decoding all of this
stuff all right let's talk about modular
arithmetic all right let's get into this
consider our clock if it's 9 00 am now
we've got a very basic clock with no
minute hand which just tells us what
hour we're in then the hour and just
points to nine basic what's it going to
be pointing to five hours from now well
if it's nine am now it's going to be
pointing to 2 p.m later on so it's going
to be pointing to two Okay so modular
arithmetic 9 plus 5 does not equal 14
because there is no 14 on the clock
in our system we've only got numbers up
to 12. so instead nine plus five gives
us two that's just how this works what
we say is that 2 is the remainder from
14 given a modulus of 12 or 14 equals
to
modular 12 or 2 mod 12 or more formally
usually you usually see it written this
way 14 equals 2 mod 12. I think of it as
a 14 is to mod 12. and modulus you know
this is a word that's used in English
rather often as well in fact I kind of
overuse it at times it's sort of fancy
English it means the word modulo means
ignoring ignoring a special case like
you know I might say something like the
free market is the absolute best way for
people to create new stuff in the
fastest way possible modulo crime that
you get from time to time you get crime
under every system free or not so we can
ignore that okay let's modulo the crime
so the free market is the fastest way
for us to create new things ignoring the
crime modulo the crime I'm admitting
okay when I talk about the free market
that yeah there's bad stuff that goes on
on but there's always bad stuff whether
you've got a free market or not so no
matter what we can put to one side the
bad stuff that exists everywhere modulo
that ignoring that
or
falsification is how we find the best
explanations in science
modulo the Jew him Quine thesis results
namely ignoring the idea that
experiments sometimes fail okay
belaboring the point 14 is 2 modulo 12
or modular 12 or in mathematics it's
usually just said as mod 14 equals two
mod 12. let's do another example because
this will come up again and we're
keeping in view this idea of wanting to
understand Shaw's algorithm from the
ground up let's not use 12. let's think
of another number like five so we're
going to imagine a clock now that just
goes from one to five let's pick a
random number 42 42 the meaning of life
according to Douglas hofstetter 42
equals something mod 5.
what well 42 equals 2 mod 5 Y2 because 2
is the remainder you get once you divide
42 by five five goes into forty two
eight times with two remaining the eight
appears nowhere in our equation there
it's it's implicit it's not explicit
you can do this yourself now what's 37
given a modulus of 5. 37 equals what mod
5. how many times does five go into 37
well it goes in seven times how many are
left over two
in other words if you had a clock that
just goes from one to five and you're
counting Round and Round Up to 37 your
hand is going to point to the two hand
once you get to 37. okay because once
you get to 35 it's going to be back to
five again start all over again so you
go five
10 15. okay round of 35 then two more
that's why but what if it ends up on
five what's five mod five zero okay so
five equals zero mod five it's just the
same once we get to six then we're back
to one again so six is one Mod Five
that's important to know okay it's
important to this idea of when the
modulus is one is going to come up again
so six is the first time you have a
remainder of One Eleven is the next time
you've got a remainder of one sixteen so
next time you've got a remainder one
then 21 then 26 notice we've got a
pattern there
that already we can see periodicity in
the case of the multiples of of 5 5 10
15 20 25 30. okay the the numbers 11 16
21 26 all have a remainder of one and
those numbers 11 16 21 26 notice the
final digit there one six one six
that's got a period of two it's
repeating every two right it's repeating
every two numbers it's repeating we're
going to come back to that so
let's remember to recap our problem here
is going to be to decrypt a message that
consists of a vastly huge number
hundreds you know 600 or maybe even
thousands well one thousand one thousand
two hundred or more digits long
and that number is itself a product of
huge prime factors the only way to
decrypt such a message hidden in this
number is to find those prime factors
and the only way we know how to do this
so far that I have explained to you so
far is to begin at two and then start
checking one at a time okay you've got
this big number and then you check does
2 go into it no what about three no five
no seven no just keep going one after
another and searching the space of all
prime numbers until you finally get one
that divides into it evenly but the
problem is when you've got these huge
numbers that are hundreds of digits long
there are just so many of them so many
prime numbers to check that this process
would take a regular computer indeed as
David says all the regular computers on
all the Earth working as fast as
possible it'll take literally trillions
of years to do it that's how many prime
numbers there are and how hard it would
be to search that space because we'll
talk talking such big prime numbers
there's got to be a better way than just
sequentially searching one after another
beginning with two right well yes and
that's what we're going to talk about
next so here's two famous formulas named
for Leonard Euler the Swiss
mathematician born in 1707 and renowned
is one of the greatest math geniuses of
all time that second formula there
typically known as Euler's identity
includes e okay the exponential for the
number defined in part by the fact that
if you well if you draw a curve a graph
of y equals e to the X well e is this
special number it's about 2.7 something
or other
such that that y equals e to the X has a
value for its derivative of every point
x which is equal to Y in other words
if you differentiate y equals e to the X
then you get e to the X if that makes no
sense to you never mind you can skip
that it's calculus okay we're not going
to do a calculus lesson here if you want
an introduction to calculus let's see my
video here
but also there you have related in one
formula that number e
crucial and calculus and we also have I
the so-called imaginary number the
square root of -1 the basis of the
complex numbers so we've got Pi there as
well we've got one and we've got zero
okay all of these foundational numbers
there in one equation one amazing
identity
okay so Euler gave us that identity and
the other one there which is well I'll
come to that he was fascinated by this
idea of repeating patterns in primes
let's just recap
42 equals 2 mod 5 because in the general
case if you write down something like a
equals X Mod n that means that when you
divide a by n you get a remainder of x
a Over N gives you a remainder of x
now Euler Euler figured out a lot of
this stuff
right he was obsessed the good kind of
obsession you're passionately curious
about numbers and arithmetic and
accounting and prime numbers in
particular he was noticing and
explaining patterns where no one else
had before and he saw links between
exponentials and periodicity hence his
formula here uh if you know anything
about trigonometry you'll know it's
about
periodicity patterns repeating okay it's
wave forms you know you have the sine
wave and the cosine wave and so you can
figure out the period of things which is
how how often something repeats itself
in terms of patterns of numbers for
example you know consider the powers of
three okay three to the power of n okay
ends the integers one two three four
five so you get
3 9 27 81 243 729 2187
6561 these are the powers of three now
now consider each of those okay the
powers of three in terms of mod 10. okay
more ten so we're going to be dividing
them by 10. so 3 equals what mod ten
nine equals what mod ten twenty seven
equals what mod ten okay I'll write the
write that down here well in in it's
what the remainder is okay so 10 goes
into three zero times it doesn't go into
three at all so you're left with just
three
ten goes into nine zero times you're
just left with nine but 10 goes into 27
twice with seven left over
10 goes into 81 8 times with one left
over so we're just writing down the
remainder okay each time how many times
does 10 go into 243 24 times with three
remainder how many times does 10 go into
729 72 times with 9 remainder these are
the powers of three so we've got a
sequence now of remainders
three nine seven one three nine seven
one ah it's repeating itself in other
words those remainders when you're
dividing by 10 give you a pattern
periodicity three nine seven one the
period is four we say it repeats every
four digits and also notice that the
ones there okay one is very important as
I said earlier and it's come up here
again now it's a remainder of one Let's
do let's just do another example just
for the fun of it uh powers of two okay
Everyone likes powers of two two four
eight sixteen thirty two 64 128 256.
well let's do mod seven okay so we're
going to be dividing each of these
numbers by seven
how many times does seven go into two it
doesn't go into two at all it just
leaves the two on its own how many times
does seven go into four again it doesn't
it doesn't go in it leaves four on its
own how many times does seven go into
eight ah now finally it goes in once
with one left over how many times does
seven go into 16 twice with two left
over how many times does seven go into
32 well it goes four times seven fourths
of Twenty Eight with four left over to
take us up to 32.
well can you see the pattern already the
remainders are two four one then two
four one two four one we've got a
pattern of two four one then it repeats
a period of three just three digits and
it ends in one
isn't that remarkable and it was Euler
that figured this stuff out so that's
absolutely amazing surprising should be
surprising to you I find it just really
cool so we've always got this situation
where in modular arithmetic if we're
finding remainders of things
they have a period
of some length and that period always
ends with one we know where it ends
because it's going to end where we find
the number that's got a remainder of one
now there are proofs for all this I'm
not proving anything to that's way too
hard I'm asking you to take it on faith
that this in fact is what's going to
happen you can look up the proof If you
like so the thing is if you if you have
um a number X and a number n
and they're relatively prime so we call
it that means that they share No factors
then this very property of having a
periodic sequence like this always
ending in one holds all the time for
this form of expression you know X Mod M
then x squared mod n and X cubed mod n
so for three mod 10
the period is full four numbers long
okay for for your powers of three and
the period of two mod seven the the
powers of two the period is three okay
two four one now we call the period
r letter r
and this is going to be absolutely
crucial one of the whole points of
Shaw's algorithm is going to be to find
R the period how frequently this modulus
reappears the remainder reappears
R is the smallest number such that x to
the power of R equals one mod n
where the 1 is the remainder that you
get and R is the period
namely in our examples with powers of
three the you know three nine twenty
seven eighty one the powers of three the
period happens to be four in other words
3 to the power of four is when you first
get a remainder of one three to the
power four equals one mod ten in our
earlier example but three squared is 9
mod 10 and we'll just look at the others
okay they don't give you the one so
knowing r
the exponent for when the remainder
first becomes one
gives us the period
all right now if you get all that you're
really making progress you're really
making progress give yourself a pat on
the back you're we're we're getting to
Shores algorithm we're getting to parts
of it getting a glimpse
into what's about to happen Okay the big
Quantum Computing stuff let's go let's
go back to our factoring of large
numbers again and we're going to bring
up a different mathematician this time
also an e mathematician Euclid so not
Euler about Euclid this time what Euclid
figured out was that rather than
starting at two and seeing if that
divides into our big number and then
three and then five and sequentially
going through all the prime numbers
up until you eventually find P by a
process of just Brute Force so to speak
we're instead going to guess
basically randomly any old number okay
because we're going to find the factors
of n we've got to find p and Q we're
going to pick any old number smaller
than n recall that a equals X Mod n we
want to know if a and N are relatively
prime do they share factors that's a
question of what their greatest common
divisor is uh greatest common divisor is
a term that's used in you know proper
professional mathematics but in high
school when I taught this stuff in
Australia anyway we used hcf highest
common factor uh you know an algorithm
to find the highest common factor or the
greatest common divisor if if people are
learning this for the first time if
you're just using small numbers this
should just write out all the factors
into to to just look in the list of all
the factors and to see which ones are
the highest let's say you've got like
180 okay so you want to find us what is
the greatest common divisor of 1
what is common to both of them and the
biggest one well literally just list all
of the factors of 80 and 100 well 80 the
factors are one two four eight twenty
forty and eighty these are the numbers
that divide into 80 without leaving a
remainder
and a hundred it's one two four five ten
twenty twenty five fifty and a hundred
okay well ones in both lists two's in
both lists fours in both lists but I'm
not interested in that I'm interested in
which number is the biggest that is in
both lists that's twenty twenty is the
highest common factor or greatest common
divisor whatever you want to call it but
when you've got two huge numbers it's
got to be a better way so enter Euclid
at this point Euclid was around you know
some hundreds of years BC the guy to
whom we owe euclidean geometry so he was
a mathematician of outstanding genius
from much earlier than Euler and this
method rarely gets taught in schools you
know I would only bring it up if if
someone was you know super interested in
this stuff
really happened to be the case it wasn't
a part of the standard curriculum but
you know people who Express curiosity
about this stuff you know they'd find
this fascinating there was a better way
there is a better way than just writing
out the the long list of factors so
that's what we're going to do we're
going to see what this algorithm is this
euclidean algorithm for finding the
factors I should say this version
of the euclidean algorithm it's blending
some more modern ways of doing things so
this is not exactly the way uh Euclid
would do it but I'm mentioning Euclid
because he deserves some credit for this
and and in reality of course we're using
you know these huge numbers n is going
to be a huge number P and Q are going to
be huge numbers we want to find P so
we're going to guess okay we're going to
guess we're going to figure out a guess
for what p and Q are we're going to call
that guess
I can use the letter A if the numbers
are relatively prime then what that
means is their greatest common divisor
is one which means they don't share any
factors at all I know I'm repeating
myself but remember we're doing this if
you're curious about this stuff but you
don't know much of this mathematics so
let's do a let's do a silly example an
easy example let's say n is 35 and if
you knew nothing about you know what are
the factors of n well you might let's
let's guess something let's guess eight
I know that's silly to guess eight but
this is illustrative okay because if
you've got a huge number you just don't
know what to guess and so you're going
to guess wrong invariably you're going
to guess wrong you know eight for our
purposes is it's clearly a bad guess on
the one hand because you know it's not
going to work but it's a good guess on
the other because straight away it is
co-prime with 35
which is what we're after it shares no
factors with 35. the factors of eight
are one two four and eight and none of
those are factors of 35. now we're going
to need a calculator because we want to
know the powers of eight okay the powers
of eight are eight to the power of one
is eight eight squared is 64. a cubed is
512 a to the power of four is four
thousand ninety six now mod 35 which is
the number that we you know we're
interested in mod 35 of each of those
numbers is
eight remember from earlier on you know
how many times does 35 go into eight
zero times leaving living with eight how
many times does 35 go into 64. it goes
one with a remainder of 29. how many
times does 35 go into 512 use a
calculator but you find out that it
leaves a remainder of 22 and
4096 we actually hit one because because
4096 mod 35
well it's 35 times 117 gives you
4095. okay check with a calculator
yourself so that means 35 goes into
4096.
117 times with a remainder of one and
that's what we're after take some
calculating but you can get there you
know you do it with guess and check now
for us to use Shaw's algorithm to use
Euler's method here R must be even all I
can say in the explanation for why it
must be even is to trust me for now
we're going to get there or you can
watch another video that goes into more
depth on this but our formula is going
to call for you'll see in a moment R
over two hence the need for an even R
okay R has to be an even value which
we've got in this particular case our R
is four why is it four because well the
remainders are 8 29 22 and 1 then it's
going to repeat 8 29 22 and 1. once
you've found a remainder of one that's
it you've found your R you've found your
period but if R in our case wasn't an
even number if it wasn't four If instead
it was five we'd need to start again
we'd need to start again with a new
guess for a until we get an even r
yeah it can be difficult so the formula
we're about to employ when you know
we're doing this is is that we want to
have a condition where a to the power of
R over 2 plus 1 does not equal zero mod
n you don't want a remainder now in
order to get the right R you don't have
to search for too long to find an even R
because half the numbers in the universe
are even so you've got a 50 50 chance of
picking a good a so let's go back to
again
one of the key Formula One of the key
identities a to the power of R equals
one mod M now because it's modular
arithmetic I can actually write and I
won't go into the details a to the power
of R minus 1 equals zero mod n if you
assert that something is zero mod n
you're saying there's no remainder zero
remainder in other words it's a multiple
of n so there must be some other number
K such that what's on the left hand side
there a to the power of R minus 1 equals
k n and again R has to be even so let me
give you some explanation why and we're
going to have to do some algebra here
and I apologize but we're going to
employ something called the difference
of two squares if you cast your mind
back to high school algebra namely x
squared minus y squared can be written
as x minus y x plus y like this and if
you don't know why don't worry just take
it on faith or go look up the difference
of two squares in algebra it's relevance
here is that if
we require a to the power of R minus 1
to equal k n then then
bear with me
a to the power of R over 2 minus 1
all multiplied by a to the power of R
over 2 plus 1 is equal to km now how
does that work well when you expand the
whole thing out a to the power of R over
2 multiplied by a to the power of R over
two equals a to the power of r
okay this is a high school algebra you
just add your indices together and
that's the difference to squares and one
is one squared one more thing n equals P
multiplied by Q remember that there the
original primes were after after all we
want to know p and Q so so n in that
formula we've just talked about the k n
can be written as kpq so in other words
we've got this now
a to the power of R over two minus one
all multiplied by a to the power of R
over two plus one is equal to kpq
if you're all at C right now and you're
throwing your hands up in the air and
you're completely lost but you don't
want to be well pause here
if you like and prove it to yourself
that that formula actually follows
expand out those brackets and convince
yourself but if you haven't got the
algebra
bear with me just for a little longer
we're gonna get there we're gonna throw
some real numbers in here now the actual
numbers we were using before were 35.
now what we did then was we guessed that
a equals eight and remember we found a
period of R equals four so using
the the condition that we require namely
a to the power of R equals one mod n
that becomes in our particular
circumstance
eight I guess was eight to the power of
four a period is four eight eight to the
power four equals one mod 35 or to
substitute it into our key formula we
can call this our key formula a to the
power of R over two minus one a to the
power of R over two plus one equals kpq
substituting all that in you know use
using that this is what we require this
is what we need to know okay this eight
to the power of four equals one mod 35
or in other words as we just said
modular arithmetic allows us to say 8 to
the power four minus one equals zero mod
35.
and the argument that we used earlier on
was zero mod 35 means that you've got
something that divides by 35 exactly in
other words a to the power 4 minus one
equals K some integer times 35. now at
this point we could solve for K but we
don't need to we want to put it in the
form that we had earlier into our key
equation our key equation is
I eat to the power of R over two minus
one all multiplied by a to the power of
R over two plus one and that equals kpq
in our particular circumstance
substituting in what we know given a
equals eight and R equals four then we
can write this down
eight
squared take away one or multiplied by 8
squared plus one equals kpq
p and Q remember as the Holy Grail
that's what we're after in order to do
our decryption so
the highest common factor or the the
greatest common divisor of a to the
power of R over two minus one and n
is p
well the greatest common divisor of a to
the power of R over two plus one and N
is Q this is because in this original
formula here okay P must divide neatly
into either a to the power of R over two
minus one or it's going to divide into
I to the power of R over two plus one
one of those is going to be p and one of
those is going to be Q now if you don't
get all of that perhaps watch you know
this video on YouTube that goes through
all of this in more detail
or actually you know if you do pause
what I've said above and watch it again
there is enough information there
um to to enable you to prove it to
yourself but I understand if you've
never heard this sort of stuff before it
can get a bit tricky just just keep in
mind that we we did place a condition
about some numbers being co-prime
earlier on that was important okay so
let's substitute okay we've got P equals
the greatest common divisor of
a to the power of R over two minus one
and N where our n in this example is 35.
and a to the power of R over two minus 1
becomes 8 to the power of four over two
minus one
which is 8 squared minus 1 which is 63
and so now we've collapsed all of this
down into finding the greatest common
divisor of 35 and 63 which is seven
seven is the number that is biggest that
will go into both of those and by the
same argument Q is the greatest common
divisor of 65 and 35 which is 5. so
that's it that's what you do that that's
how you crack RSA security right what's
the problem well the problem is that
finding R in the first place for a huge
number a really big number that's the
stumbling block that takes our
metaphorical forever because you need to
write out all of those Powers it's an
intractable problem but this method is
progress because we've gone from a
problem where we need to search
sequentially all the prime numbers two
three five seven nine all the way up to
p and Q which is a rather hopeless
Prospect to a somewhat less hopeless
Prospect finding the period R which is
kind of easier it's certainly easier for
a quantum computer to do a quantum
computer doesn't have to search through
all of the primes it can just find this
period but this is part of the key part
of Shaw's algorithm in a nutshell sort
of but we haven't yet introduced
anything Quantum to do with this which
makes finding the r easy so let's go
there we need the quantum because if n
is really big and it is as I keep saying
in RSA then r
the period of the reminder the modulus
is going to be almost as big as n that's
a problem classically because
classically you may as well search you
know all the prime numbers two three
five seven etc etc to find the prime
factors of p and Q you may as well do
that as find R being the the period of a
mod n where a is your guess
with Quantum Computing what you can do
is have the quantum computer in a
superposition
of n States and you can check you can
check a to the power of one mod N A
Squared mod n a to the power of 3 mod n
and so on up to whatever a to the power
of X Mod n until we find
a to the power of X is one okay we get
that that one remainder remember that's
our condition that tells us R when that
remainder is one but we're not checking
sequentially and if you've got this
quantum computer you can't check
um sequentially basically because well
you're in a particular universe and when
you look at a computer when you ask the
computer for a result you're only going
to get one result you're going to be
told by the computer that either three
is a factor or not it's not much more
help than what a classical computer
would be you're kind of randomly
selecting to know whether or not a
particular number is a factor of n you
know you'll get for example a cubed mod
n which in all likelihood won't be the
one you're after you want the one where
you're getting the remainder of one but
and here's the key here's the quantum
key to all this
ah the period
is a global property of all the states
of all the computers of of the quantum
computer of all the
instances of the computer in the various
universes in the Multiverse sure didn't
put it quite that way but this is the
Insight across the Multiverse we would
say the period of the wave function
waves have periods right that's a thing
we can know from within any one Universe
it doesn't depend on which Universe
you're in because the wave function is a
property of the Multiverse it's common
to all states and so therefore so too is
the period ah Isn't that cool
okay so here's where I'm completely
glossing over further details because
then we do need to get into University
level physics we need something called
the quantum Fourier transform what it
does is it amplifies the correct State
out of all those a to the power of X Mod
n possibilities
this happens how does this happen it
happens by constructive interference
and all the incorrect answers
destructively interfere and so this way
the correct answer kind of bubbles to
the top so to speak it is it is the one
that the quantum computer can tell you
has the highest amplitude you know and
the square of the amplitude is the
probability okay the expectation value
whatever now okay I fear I'm losing the
audience and if I go into any further
detail on this stuff I'm going to lose
everyone but if you've come this far and
you're not lost then I see my role as
having succeeded I've given you the cab
ride to the airport I hope and if you
want to go further and really want to
zoom off into the details of Shaw's
algorithm then well you can't go past
the great arter Eckhart so student
Protege we might say of the great David
Deutsch himself art is like the Obi-Wan
Kenobi to David's Yoda
I mean now Arthur himself is such a Jedi
master himself he he meant to mentors
and inspires he has mentored and
inspired countless numbers of quantum
physicists over the years so if you want
to learn from a true Jedi Master about
this stuff and not some Pretender like
me then go to Arthur's video right here
which is where I admit I'm distilling
out a lot of the high level technical
stuff into this here very bird's eye
view explanation of things for people
with almost no mathematical background
in other words I've just been stealing
his material and bringing it down quite
a few notches and by the way if you want
the history of all of this Shaw's
algorithm stuff with some quite
technical details Peter Shaw himself has
a half hour video here on YouTube worth
looking up links in the description but
let's now that I've given you all that
go back to the book the fabric of
reality and conclude our reading and I'm
going to start at a point where you're
going to get a little bit of a giggle
because David writes
quote Shaw's algorithm is
extraordinarily simple
[Music]
that's the funny part after everything
I've just said there let me go on
David says Shaw's algorithm is
extraordinarily simple and requires far
more modest Hardware than would be
needed for a universal quantum computer
okay no but really as far as the high
level physics and Mathematics goes it is
simple I've been you know laboriously
starting literally from the ground up
basically Primary School level
mathematics to bring you to a point
where you're glimpsing you can at least
glimpse
The Graduate level physics that follows
that was my task I hope I've succeeded
at that so if you have some undergrad
physics and Mathematics well level of
understanding then it is simple and it's
also simple in the sense of what it's
doing Simple in David Deutsch's way of
explaining what simple is which is
relative to your theory of computation
finding the period finding that R is a
simple physical computation simple for a
quantum computer not simple for a
classical computer let's keep going
because now David's going to put a an
everadian multiversal spin on everything
that I've just been talking about it
goes on quote it is likely therefore
that a Quantum factorization engine will
be built long before the full range of
quantum computations is technologically
feasible this is a prospect of great
significance for cryptography the
science of securely communicating and
authenticating information
realistic communication networks may be
Global and have large constantly
changing sets of participants with
unpredictable patterns of communication
it is Impractical to require every pair
of participants physically and in
advance to exchange secret cryptographic
keys that will allow them to later
communicate without fear of
eavesdroppers
public key cryptography is any method of
sending secret information where the
sender and the recipient do not already
share any secret information the most
secure known method of public key
cryptography depends on the
intractability of the problem of
factorizing large numbers this method is
known as the RSA crypto system named
after Ronald revest ADI Shamir and
Leonard Adelman who first proposed it in
1978. I thought it was 1976 anyway
keep going it depends on a mathematical
procedure whereby a message can be
encoded using a large say 250 digit
number as a key end quote so since the
book was written things have changed
slightly and people are using up to 600
digits in fact double that as I've said
you know I've seen 1200 as another
number that's quoted for this stuff it
goes on to say quote the recipient can
freely make this key public because any
message encoded with it can only be
decoded given a knowledge of the factors
of that number thus I can choose two 125
digit prime numbers and keep them secret
but multiply them together and make
their 250 digit product public anyone
can send me a message using that number
as the key but only I can read the
messages because only I know the secret
factors as I have said there is no
practical Prospect of factorizing 250
digit numbers by classical means but a
Quantum factorization engine running
Shaw's algorithm could do it using only
a few thousand arithmetic operations
which might well take only a matter of
minutes so anyone with access to such a
machine would easily be able to read any
intercepted message that had been
encrypted using the RSA crypto system it
would do the cryptographers no good to
choose larger numbers as keys because
the resources required by Shaw's
algorithm increase only slowly with the
size of the number being factorized in
the quantum theory of computation
factorization is a very tractable task
it is thought that in the presence of a
given level of decoherence there would
again be a practical limit on the size
of the number that could be factorized
but there is no known lower limit on the
rate of D coherence that can be
technologically achieved so we must
conclude that one day in the future at a
time that cannot now be predicted the
RSA crypto system with any given length
of key may become insecure in a certain
sense that makes it insecure even today
for anyone or any organization that
records an RSA encrypted message today
and waits until they can buy a Quantum
factorization Engine with low enough D
coherence will be able to decode the
message that may not happen for
centuries or it may only be decades
perhaps less who can tell but the
likelihood that it will be rather a long
time is all that now remains of the
former complete Security of the RSA
system when a Quantum factorization
engine is factoring a 250 digit number
the number of interfering universe
will be of the order of 10 to the power
of 500. this staggeringly large number
is the reason why Shaw's algorithm makes
factorization tractable I said that the
algorithm requires only a few thousand
arithmetic operations I meant of course
a few thousand operations in each
universe that contributes to the answer
all those computations are performed in
parallel in different universes and
share their results through interference
you may be wondering how we can persuade
our counterparts in 10 to the power 500
odd universes to start working on our
factorization task will they not have
their own agendas for the use of their
computers no and no persuasion is
necessary Shaw's algorithm operates
initially only on a set of universes
that are identical to one another and
then it causes them to become
differentiated only within the confines
of the factorization engine
posing Mr reflection yeah this is a key
point to notice and it's something that
David Wallace is a pain is to make
explicit in the emergent Multiverse
where he talks about and in his own
public lectures on this
the definition of a universe is a
slippery kind of a thing when we're
talking the everettian Multiverse a
universe can be
all the stars and galaxies and as big as
that what we normally call universe but
it can also be something that is
effectively isolated from the rest of
physical reality that we can observe
inside of a box somewhere namely inside
of a quantum computer or as David is
referring to it there a Quantum
factorization engine he goes on to say
quote so we who specified the number to
be factorized and who wait while the
answer is computed are identical
in all the interfering universes there
are no doubt many other universes in
which we program different numbers or
never built the factorization engine at
all but those universes differ from ours
in too many variables or more precisely
in variables that are not made to
interact in the right way by the
programming of Shaw's algorithm and so
do not interfere with our universe
the argument of chapter two that was
Shadows applied to any interference
phenomenon destroys the classical idea
that there is only one Universe
logically the possibility of complex
Quantum computation adds nothing to a
case that is already unanswerable but it
does add psychological impact with
Shaw's algorithm the argument has been
ripped very large to those who still
cling to a single Universe world view I
issue this challenge
explain how Shaw's algorithm works I do
not merely mean predict that it will
work which is merely a matter of solving
a few uncontroversial equations I mean
provide an explanation
when Shaw's algorithm has factorized a
number using 10 to the power of 500 or
so times the computational resources
that can be seen to be present where was
the number factorized there are only
about 10 to the power of 80 atoms in the
entire visible universe and utterly
minuscule number compared with 10 to the
power 500 so if the visible Universe
were the extent of physical reality
physical reality will not even remotely
contain the resources required to
factorize such a large number
who did factorize it then how and where
was the computation performed okay I'm
going to skip a bit now
this idea that
quantum computers will destroy
cryptography the RSA system
doesn't mean that
cryptography itself is a doomed
Enterprise because you can have Quantum
cryptography
David goes on to talk about exactly this
so let's just read through that
we're coming swiftly to the end of the
chapter David Wright's quote I have been
discussing traditional types of
mathematical tasks that quantum
computers would be able to perform more
quickly than existing machines but there
is an additional class of new tasks open
to quantum computers that no classical
computer could perform at all by a
strange coincidence one of the first of
these tasks to be discovered also
concerns public key cryptography this
time it is not a matter of breaking an
existing system but of implementing a
new
absolutely secure system of quantum
cryptography in 1989 at IBM research
Yorktown Heights New York in the office
of the theoretician Charles Bennett the
first working quantum computer was built
it was a special purpose quantum
computer consisting of a pair of quantum
cryptographic devices designed by
Bennett and Gile brassade of the
University of Montreal it became the
first machine ever to perform
non-trivial computations that no turing
machine could perform in Bennett and
brassard's Quantum crypto system
messages are encoded in the states of
individual photons emitted by a laser
although many photons are needed to
transmit a message one Photon per bit
plus many more photons wasted in various
inefficiencies the machines can be built
with existing technology because they
need to perform their Quantum
computations on only one Photon at a
time the system security is based not on
intractability either classical or
Quantum but directly on the properties
of quantum interference that is what
gives it it's classically unobtainable
absolute security no amount of future
computation by any sort of computer
whether for millions of trillions of
years would be of any help to an
eavesdropper on Quantum encrypted
messages for if one communicates through
a medium exhibiting interference one can
detect eavesdroppers according to
classical physics there is nothing that
can prevent an eavesdropper who has
physical access to a communication
medium such as a telephone line from
installing a passive listening device
but as I have explained if one makes any
measurement on a Quantum system one
Alters its subsequent interference
properties the communication protocol
relies on this effect the communicating
parties effectively set up repeated
interference experiments coordinating
them over a Public Communication channel
only if the interference passes the
tests for there having been no
eavesdropper do they pass on to the next
stage of the protocol which is to use
some of the transmitted information as a
cryptographic key at worst assistant
eavesdropper might prevent any
communication from taking place at all
though of course that is more easily
achieved just by cutting the telephone
line
but as for reading a message only the
intended recipient can do that and the
guarantee of that is provided by the
laws of physics because Quantum
cryptography depends upon manipulating
individual photons It suffers from a
major limitation each Photon that is
successfully received carrying one bit
of the message must somehow have been
transmitted intact from the transmitter
to the receiver but every method of
transmission involves losses and if
these are too heavy the message will
never arrive setting up relay stations
which is the remedy for this problem in
existing communication systems would
compromise the security because an
eavesdropper could without being
detected monitor what's going on inside
the relay station the best existing
Quantum cryptographic systems use Fiber
Optic Cables and have a range of about
10 kilometers this would suffice to
provide say the financial district of
the city with absolutely secure internal
Communications marketable systems may
not be far away but to solve the problem
of public key cryptography in general
all so for Global Communications further
advances in Quantum cryptography are
required
experimental and theoretical research in
the field of quantum computation is
accelerating worldwide ever more
promising new technologies for realizing
quantum computers are being proposed and
new types of quantum computation with
various advantages over classical
computation are continually being
discovered and analyzed I find all these
developments very exciting and I believe
that some of them will bear
technological fruit but as far as this
book is concerned that's a side issue
from a fundamental standpoint it does
not matter how useful Quantum
computation turns out to be nor does it
matter whether we build the first
Universal quantum computer next week or
centuries from now or never
the quantum theory of computation must
in any case be an integral part of the
world view of anyone who seeks a
fundamental understanding of reality
what quantum computers tell us about
connections between the laws of physics
universality and apparently unrelated
strands of explanation of the fabric of
reality we can discover and are already
discovering by studying them
theoretically end quote end of the
chapter
well that was
um an epic episode I think I hope I
didn't
you know bore too many people with uh my
long diversion in their
to the details of some of the underlying
arithmetic required for Shaw's algorithm
I hope it was informative but as I sang
this chapter could have been a book all
on its own
next time we're going to go to one of my
favorite chapters
the nature of mathematics which we've
talked about all the way back in the
beginning of Infinity Series on the
reality of abstractions
this had perhaps the second greatest
impact upon me decades ago when I first
read the book second only to Shadows
which revealed to me the nature of
quantum theory and how to understand it
by the Multiverse well this the nature
of mathematics made me completely
rethink what had always been taught and
thought I understood about what
mathematics is
many of you will already be familiar if
you're a fan of topcasts the
mathematician's misconception which I've
talked about a lot
but we're going to go back to where it
all began chapter 10 the nature of
mathematics next time
but until then
I hope that you feel you're informed now
about Quantum computation I'm excited
about the possibilities and have an
understanding of how an understanding of
quantum computation is required for an
understanding of our deepest theories
fabric of reality
until next time bye-bye
oh
um
[Music]